BILLING CODE 4000-01-P DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION Docket No.: ED-2026-SCC-1750 Agency Information Collection Activities; Comment Request; Measures and Methods for the National Reporting System for Adult Education AGENCY: Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education (OCTAE), Department of Education (ED). ACTION: Notice. SUMMARY: In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) of 1995, the Department is proposing an extension without change of a currently approved information collection request (ICR). DATES: Interested persons are invited to submit comments on or before INSERT DATE 60 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER. ADDRESSES: To access and review all the documents related to the information collection listed in this notice, please use  by searching the Docket ID number ED-2026-SCC-1750. Comments submitted in response to this notice should be submitted electronically through the Federal eRulemaking Portal at  by selecting the Docket ID number or via postal mail, commercial delivery, or hand delivery. If the regulations.gov site is not available to the public for any reason, the Department will temporarily accept comments at ICDocketMgred.gov. Please include the docket ID number and the title of the information collection request when requesting documents or submitting comments. Please note that comments submitted after the comment period will not be accepted. Written requests for information or comments submitted by postal mail or delivery should be addressed to the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Career, Technical, This document is scheduled to be published in the Federal Register on 2026-05-26 and available online at  and on  and Adult Education, Attention: John LeMaster, 400 Maryland Ave, SW, LBJ, Room 4A113, Washington, D.C. 20202. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For specific questions related to collection activities, please contact John LeMaster, 202-987-0903. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The Department, in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA) (44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(2)(A)), provides the general public and Federal agencies with an opportunity to comment on proposed, revised, and continuing collections of information. This helps the Department assess the impact of its information collection requirements and minimize the publics reporting burden. It also helps the public understand the Departments information collection requirements and provide the requested data in the desired format. The Department is soliciting comments on the proposed information collection request (ICR) that is described below. The Department is especially interested in public comment addressing the following issues: (1) is this collection necessary to the proper functions of the Department; (2) will this information be processed and used in a timely manner; (3) is the estimate of burden accurate; (4) how might the Department enhance the quality, utility, and clarity of the information to be collected; and (5) how might the Department minimize the burden of this collection on the respondents, including through the use of information technology. Please note that written comments received in response to this notice will be considered public records. Title of Collection: Measures and Methods for the National Reporting System for Adult Education OMB Control Number: 1830-0027 Type of Review: An extension without change of a currently approved ICR Respondents / Affected Public: State, Local, and Tribal Government Total Estimated Number of Annual Responses: 57 Total Estimated Number of Annual Burden Hours: 5,700 Abstract: The respondents are the 57 states/outlying areas that receive adult education state grant funds under the Adult Education and Family Literacy Act (AEFLA). The information collected is the states annual performance report. OCTAE will use the data to ensure that states meet the performance accountability requirements of AEFLA. Ross Santy, Chief Data Officer, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development. FR Doc. 2026-10427 Filed: 5/22/2026 8:45 am; Publication Date: 5/26/2026